Specification draft (#2)
UniversalPipeWrench/unified-user-data-format: README.md

# unified-user-data-format

Specification for the unified user data format across the various "Tube" apps (NewPipe, FreeTube, Invidious, etc..)

## Intro

* This specification is a very early draft, and prone to regular changes
* Unless otherwise specified, all fields are assumed to be `Strings`

## Top level structure

#### `"version"`

The [semantic version](https://semver.org/) of the specification.

Conditions for bumping major/minor/patch version: TBD
Potential suffixes: `-draft`, TBD

> #### `"subscrpitions"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `"subscriptions"`
```

An array of Subscription objects. See below for details.

> #### `"subscrpitions"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `"playlists"`
```

An array of Playlist objects. See below for details.

### Overview

```javascript
{
	"version": "X.Y.Z[-draft/-rc]",

> 	"subscriptions": Subscrpitions[],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"subscriptions": Subscriptions[],
```

	"playlists": Playlist[],
}
```

> ## Subscription object

Reviewer 2: Could we also include an `id` field too?

For YouTube, it would be the Channel ID.

Author: See my previous comment regarding URNs

#### > `"name"`

The name of the subscribed channel.

#### > `"url"`

The URL used to access the user subscribed channel.

#### > `"thumbnail"`

> The URL to the user/channel's thumbnail.

Reviewer 2: I feel this should be an optional field, since:

- It's not really necessary for importing subscriptions.
- Can change and 404 in the future.

It's also ambiguous whether this should be a direct link to the image or a proxied URL to the media.

Author: resolved in https://github.com/UniversalPipeWrench/unified-user-data-format/pull/2/commits/5a9c3d95466dab7a3b11d05be5159beb545a5621

### Example

```javascript
{
  "name": "Linus Tech Tips",
  "url": "https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCXuqSBlHAE6Xw-yeJA0Tunw",
  "thumbnail": "https://yt3.ggpht.com/ytc/abcdef..."
}
```

> ## Playlist object

Reviewer 2: A thumbnail attribute could be added too.

> ## Playlist object

Reviewer 3: Something along these lines will do, I guess:

```json
{
  "name": "World Of Walker (Full Album)",
  "author": "Alan Walker",
  "url": "https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLYT4vq6pQVSvgqA8Qsm8TXjYJMTT2XyNV",
  "thumbnail": "https://yt3.ggpht.com/ytc/abcdef..."
}
```

The author can be considered optional. Remote playlists should be in a separate section, obviously.

#### > `"name"`

The title of the playlist.

#### > `"visibility"`

The visibility of the playlist.

> Accepted values: "public", "unlisted", "private"

Reviewer 4: There should also be a value for when the playlist is stored locally rather than on an external server.

Author: This part of the spec only covers user-created playlists.
I think that saved/subscribed playlists (= not created by the user) should be stored differently.

Author: Update: saved playlists have been addressed in https://github.com/UniversalPipeWrench/unified-user-data-format/pull/2/commits/d3f874b46ab88e8586b37a1c6ebedfb13c9d2e26

#### > `"description"`

The description of the playlist.
Format: plain text (? TBD)

> CAN be ommited; In this case, the parser MUST assume an empty `String`.

Reviewer 2: nitpick: I feel null would be more appropriate if there's no description set/present

Author: I personally prefer omitting fields than null-ing them

Reviewer 4: Json parsers in type/null-safe languages make it much easier/less likely to forget to check for null than an empty string.

Reviewer 3: I also agree it's better to use `null` instead of omitting the field completely

#### > `"videos"`

> An array of `String`.

Reviewer 2: Could this instead be an object with and `id` and `url` for parsing simplicity?

Author: I was thinking to evolve to [Uniform Resource Names (URN)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Name), which can be easily adapted to various services and kinds of date. E.g:
* `urn:stdtube:youtube:channel:<id>`
* `urn:stdtube:youtube:video:<id>`
* `urn:stdtube:peertube:<instance FQDN>:<path>`

Reviewer 4: @SamantazFox  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Name#Namespaces
> In order to ensure the global uniqueness of URN namespaces, their identifiers (NIDs) are required to be registered with the [IANA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Assigned_Numbers_Authority).

Reviewer 3: We don't really need to pack information in only one string in a specific way. We can just define a json object of this form to replace URLs:
```json
{
  "type": "video",
  "service": "youtube",
  "instance": null,
  "id": "djV11Xbc914",
  "url": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djV11Xbc914",
}
```

Also, if we decide not to use URLs, we should agree on what exactly an ID is for all services. For example, the first letters of YouTube playlist IDs are used to specify the playlist type, so technically those should not appear in `"id"`, but rather many different playlist `"type"`s should be created. Another example can be observed with PeerTube's accounts vs channels: they are (slightly) different entities with different URLs, so either we distinguish them into two different `"type"`s, or we include part of the URL in the ID. Examples: [YouTube normal playlist (PL)](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=RDCLAK5uy_nZiG9ehz_MQoWQxY5yElsLHCcG0tv9PRg), [YouTube genre mix (RDCLAK)](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=RDCLAK5uy_nZiG9ehz_MQoWQxY5yElsLHCcG0tv9PRg), [PeerTube account (/a/)](https://framatube.org/a/programmingfish@tube.piweb.be), [PeerTube channel (/c/)](https://framatube.org/c/programmingfish_channel@tube.piweb.be).

I think creating new `"type"`s each time a service is added is complicated, breaks compatibility and provides almost useless information. Therefore, only three types should exist: channel, playlist and video. The ID field should then contain standardized IDs based on the service (so e.g. PeerTube channel/account IDs would be, respectively, `c/...` and `a/...`).

... or we can just use only URLs directly and avoid all of these complications. In the end URLs are already "Uniform Resource Locator"s, so why bother creating our own way to uniquely locate resources? In this case we should also agree on which URL formats are ok, e.g. we might decide that these things are forbidden: useless parameters (e.g. t=5), short urls (e.g. youtu.be), http instead of https, YouTube urls from other frontends (e.g. https://invidious.kavin.rocks/watch?v=djV11Xbc914 instead of https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djV11Xbc914)... Maintaining such a list of requirements is not so difficult, and even if one requirement were not respected by a frontend, other frontends would be able to open the URLs anyway in most cases, since usually frontends do allow opening strange/random URLs from the user anyway.

Reviewer 4: I personally prefer the json object approach rather than a url, as libraries for interacting with frontends/services typically do not have you pass a url, rather you may call high order functions with parameters to specify what data to return. if a url was used a (likely more complicated) parser would be required.

When it comes to the id, it may differ depending on what library is being used, so it is probably best to see what each of your libraries use.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could include the `url` along with the `id`?  That seems like a more reasonable approach to me. I do agree that it can be tedious at times to parse just the id.

We can't just include just the `id`, as that contains no information about the service it is for.

Reviewer 4: In the example json object posted:
> ```
> {
>  "type": "video",
>  "service": "youtube",
>  "instance": null,
>  "id": "djV11Xbc914",
>  "url": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djV11Xbc914",
>}
>```

The service, instance and type are specified.

> An array of `String`.

Reviewer 4: Probably not as these can just be fetched by the app, and just bloata the format for no good reason.

> An array of `String`.

Reviewer 3: I think it should be consistent across the document, so either an (optional) thumbnail is allowed in all places, or it is not allowed anywhere

> An array of `String`.

Author: I've made the thumbnail present everywhere, but I don't think we should save more metadata in here.
I'm afraid that it'd grew out of control.

Each item of the array is an URL representing one video in the playlist.

> Items has to be sorted in the same order as the videos in the playlist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The array must be sorted in the same order as the videos in the playlist.
```

# unified-user-data-format

Specification for the unified user data format across the various "Tube" apps (NewPipe, FreeTube, Invidious, etc..)

## Intro

* This specification is a very early draft, and prone to regular changes
* Unless otherwise specified, all fields are assumed to be `Strings`

## Main file (`main.json`)

#### `"version"`

The [semantic version](https://semver.org/) of the specification.

Conditions for bumping major/minor/patch version: TBD
Potential suffixes: `-draft`, TBD

#### `"subscriptions"`

An array of [subscription objects](spec/subscription_object).

#### `"playlists"`

An array of Strings.

Each string refers to the name of a playlist file (without the `playlist_` prefix)
that was included in the export.

#### `"watch_history_present"`

A Boolean.

> Indicates whether the special playlist `watch_history` was included in the export.

Reviewer 2: Should we really be doing this? Watch history can have additional fields such as the watched till duration, and additional metadata. I would suggest an additional format to store this.

Author: This field is only here to indicate if the `watch_history` file is part of the export.
The format of the watch history can still evolve regardless!

Author: @FireMasterK if that confuses you, I can reword that part!
Right now, videos in history and regular playlists are the same objects, but that's definitely going to change ^^

Reviewer 2: > @FireMasterK if that confuses you, I can reword that part! Right now, videos in history and regular playlists are the same objects, but that's definitely going to change ^^

That makes more sense! I think they can be reworded once we finalize a specification for watch history too.

But, in such a scenario, can't we remove this field altogether?

Author: I was thinking to make some files optional during the export (like the watch history).
This field's purpose is ti tell the importer whether that file is supposed to be present in the export.

Conditions for bumping major/minor/patch version: TBD
Potential suffixes: `-draft`, TBD

#### `"subscriptions"`

An array of [subscription objects](spec/subscription_object).

#### `"playlists"`

An array of Strings.

Each string refers to the name of a playlist file (without the `playlist_` prefix)
that was included in the export.

#### `"saved_playlists_present"`

A Boolean.

Indicates whether the `saved_playlists.json` file was included in the export.

#### `"watch_history_present"`

A Boolean.

Indicates whether the special playlist `watch_history` was included in the export.

### Overview

```javascript
{
	"version": "X.Y.Z[-draft/-rc]",
	"saved_playlists_present": Boolean,
	"watch_history_present": Boolean,
	"subscriptions": SubscriptionObject[],
	"playlists": String[],
}
```

## Playlist file (`playlist_xxx.json`)

A playlist file MUST contain the data of a single playlist created by the user.

#### > `"name"`

The title of the playlist.

#### > `"visibility"`

The visibility of the playlist.

Accepted values: "public", "unlisted", "private"

#### > `"description"`

The description of the playlist.
Format: plain text (? TBD)

> CAN be nil; In this case, the parser MUST assume an empty `String`.

Reviewer 4: Why is it assuming an empty string if the value is `nil`?

Reviewer 2: Agree, I think it's perfectly reasonable to assume `null` for a description if none was ever set.

Author: I probably need to improve the wording... The idea is that nil and empty string have to be considered the same (that is, no description is present).

Reviewer 4: Ideally there should only be null if there is no description, and otherwise there is a string.
